# Top-5-Football-Leagues-Clustering-Analysis

Project formulation: For this project my goal is to cluster teams in the top 5 leagues by their passing statistics and pass types to determine teams that are similar in playing style. These statistics are scraped from FB Reference and they are all from the 2022-23 season. My initial plan is to do this with a combination of the aforementioned stats to best represent the team’s overall play style: this includes type of ball progression from defense to attack, amount of crosses, through balls, and short vs. long passes. I plan on using K-means clustering in python to do this. Often in the soccer world we classify teams on a scale somewhere between controlling possession and direct counter attack. I think this project is useful because it can show how these play styles can be quantified and how distinct the groups of tactical approaches are. If there are more distinct clusters, then it is evident that certain general patterns of play are effective across all of Europe’s best leagues. If there is more of a sliding scale of play styles, then we will have insight into how important individual managers’ philosophies are. Looking at contemporary literature, “K-means cluster analysis was also used by Gollan, Ferrar, and Norton [36] to recognize playing styles. Three game style clusters were identified: (1) moderately favoring established defense, (2) dominant in transition offense and transition defense, and (3) strong in established offense and set pieces. The disadvantage of this method is that it does neither recognize playing styles, nor is it capable of quantifying them; instead, it categorizes the teams based on the phases in which they excel” (Plakias S et al., Identifying Soccer Teams’ Styles of Play: A Scoping and Critical Review.) After reading this I still want to proceed with K-means clustering, but I will keep in mind the known downsides. It makes sense that clustering would result in teams being categorized based on what they are good at, so I will try and use statistics that are more representative of style of play instead of quality of play. For example, number of attempted/completed long and short passes rather than percent completed would be better at showing style of play.

Conclusions, Limitations & Takeaways: The biggest takeaway from this is that it will take a lot more advanced analysis to truly categorize teams based on passing style. While I was successfully able to cluster teams based on a few features, the use of principal components combined with clustering does not lend itself well to interpretability. I know that teams within each cluster that are close to each other have similar scores based on the principal components, and I know the most important variables for those principal components, but nailing down the exact way of playing that each cluster represents is not entirely possible with my analysis. However, what I have done is useful for seeing which teams are at their very core similar in terms of how they pass. This has applications in scouting and opponent analysis. When searching for new signings that may fit a team's play style, one could look at this 3D scatter plot or search in the data frame for teams within the cluster that their team belongs to. Say West Ham were looking to further bolster their midfield after losing Declan Rice. They could look at this graph and identify Hoffenheim or Athletic Club as teams with potentially suitable midfielders based on passing style. Of course this would only be a very small part of the scouting process but it would allow the scouting staff to gain insight into play style compatability. There is so much that goes into a transfer being successful so any unique information such as this could be a very important piece in the puzzle. Additionally, this could be used to look at opponents, especially those in European competitions such as the Europa League or Champions League. If hypothetically Rennes had to play Roma in the Europa League, they could look at this plot and notice that Roma is very similar to Toulouse in terms of passing style, who they play domestically and far more frequently. Overall I am happy with how this project went, I look forward to doing more clustering analysis in the future. I would like to do more player specific work next to see which players are similar, potentially uncovering hidden gems so to speak in the transfer market.
